

Classifying Knowledge Domains of Theoretical and Quantitative Geography publications

An important aspect of Theoretical and Quantitative Geography (TQG) is the intented strong integration of theory with modelling. The Knowledge Domains (KDs) proposed by (Livet et al., 2010) can be used to explore this property, by classifying TQG publications into the Theoretical, Modelling, and Empirical domains. This opens avenues to a systematic mapping of the role of theory in the TQG landscape. However, manual labelling is not achievable for large corpuses. We propose in this contribution to evaluate machine learning methods for an automatic classification of KDs in TQG publications. We use the corpus of TheoQuant proceedings (1993-2011, every two years), labelling manually 234 abstracts to obtain training data. Abstracts were first translated into English using the google translate API, as no French domain-specific language model was recently developped for scientific publications. We then use titles and abstracts concatenated for a multi-binary classification of KDs. A baseline model combining tf-idf with a logistic classifier is compared against the SciBERT language model (Beltagy et al., 2019), for a 5-fold cross-validation on the annotated corpus. We obtain a similar performance in terms of F1-score (0.48+-0.05 against 0.46+-0.03 for the baseline), suggesting this classification task is very difficult on abstracts only with no significant improvement for the language model. Hyperparameter tuning for SciBERT seems to slightly improve the performance but still needs further investigation and sensitivity analysis. Our approach opens the way to future applications on larger corpuses, to systematically explore how knowledge is effectively produced in TQG.



References

Beltagy, I., Lo, K., & Cohan, A. (2019). SciBERT: A pretrained language model for scientific text. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.10676.

Livet, Pierre, et al. "Ontology, a Mediator for Agent-Based Modeling in Social Science." Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation 13.1 (2010): 1-3.


Paper

Not included in thematic session

Knowledge Domains ; Machine Learning ; SciBERT



